Actuator
========

Actuator allows you to use Python to declaratively describe system
infra, configuration, and execution requirements, and then provision
them in the cloud.

1.  Intro  
2.  Installing  
3.  Basic  
4.  IDE install  
5.  Requirements  
6.  Python version  
7.  Core packages  
8.  Tutorial  
9.  Documentation  
10. Hadoop Example  
11. Roadmap (yet to come)  
12. Acknowledgements

Intro
-----

Current status

-   12 Feb 2015: Actuator can provision a limited set of items against
    Openstack clouds. It can create instances, networks, subnets,
    routers (plus router gateways and interfaces), and floating IPs. Not
    all options available via the Python Openstack client libraries are
    supported for each provisionable. Namespace models can drive the
    variable aspects of infra models successfully, and acquire
    information from the infra model such as IPs of a provisioned
    server. These can then be accessed by the configuration model, which
    has support of a small set of Ansible modules (specifically, ping,
    command, shell, script, and copy file), as well as a task that can
    process a template file through the namespace before it gets copied
    to a remote machine. Environment variables are populated from the
    namespace model for each configuration activity run on a remote
    system. Due to the direct dependency on Ansible, Actuator must
    itself run on a *nix box. A number of features over the Oct status
    have been added to make the environment more expressive.

Actuator seeks to provide an end-to-end set of tools for spinning up
systems in the cloud, from provisioning the infra, defining the names
that govern operation, configuring the infra for the software that is to
be run, and then executing that system's code on the configured infra.

It does this by providing facilities that allow a system to be described
as a collection of models in a declarative fashion directly in Python
code, in a manner similar to various declarative systems for ORMs
(Elixir being a prime example). Being in Python, these models:

-   can be very flexible and dynamic in their composition  
-   can be integrated with other Python packages  
-   can be authored and browsed in existing IDEs  
-   can be debugged with standard tools  
-   can be used in a variety of ways  
-   and can be factored into multiple modules of reusable sets of
    declarative components

And while each model provides capabilties on their own, they can be
inter-related to not only exchange information, but to allow instances
of a model to tailor the content of other models.

Actuator uses a Python class as the basis for defining a model, and the
class serves as a logical description of the item being modeled; for
instance a collection of infrastructure components for a system. These
model classes can have both static and dynamic aspects, and can
themselves be easily created within a factory function to make the
classes' content highly variable.

Actuator models can be related to each other so that their structure and
data can inform and sometimes drive the content of other models.

Installing
----------

Basic

The best way to try Actuator out is to create a virtual Python
environment with virtualenv and then use pip to install Actuator into it
(virtualenv will take care of installing pip for you). After you fetch
virtualenv and install it into your global Python 2.7, you can create an
"Actuator test" (at) environment under your home directory with the
following command:

    ~/tmp$ virtualenv --no-site-packages ~/at

You then need to activate the environment to work in it; do that with
the following shell command:

    ~/tmp$ source ~/at/bin/activate

This will change your shell command prompt to now be prepended with the
name of your virtual environment, in this case '(at)'. Clone the
Actuator project and cd into the project root (where the setup.py file
is). There, run the following pip command to install Actuator into your
virtual environment:

    (at)~/tmp/actuator/$ pip install .

Now, while in your virtual environment, you can start Python and import
Actuator:

    (at)~/tmp/actuator$ python
    Python 2.7.6 (default, Mar 22 2014, 22:59:56) 
    [GCC 4.8.2] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> from actuator import *
    >>> 

When you're done playing around with Actuator, remember to deactivate
your virtual env:

    (at)~/tmp/actuator$ deactivate
    ~/tmp/actuator$

IDE install

To get the full value of Actuator, you'll want to use it from an IDE.
Once you have a virtual environment set up, most IDEs provide a way add
additional Python interpreters to choose from when you start a project.
You can add the interpreter from the virtual environment created above,
and the IDE will then know all about Actuator.

The details vary from IDE to IDE, but there's lots of help on the web
for this process. For instance, here are directions for adding
interpreters to Eclipse using the PyDev plugin:

http://pydev.org/manual_101_interpreter.html

Requirements
------------

Python version

Actuator has been developed against Python 2.7. Support for 3.x will
come later.

Core packages

Actuator requires the following packages:

-   networkx, 1.9 minimum  
-   ipaddress, 1.0.4 minimum  
-   fake_factory (to support running tests), 0.4.2 minimum  
-   ansible, 1.7.2 minimum. Currently required for configuration tasks,
    but other config systems will be supported in the future  
-   subprocess32, 3.2.6 minimum. MUST BE IMPORTED BEFORE ANY ANSIBLE
    MODULES  
-   python_novaclient, 2.18.1 minimum (for Openstack)  
-   python_neutronclient, 2.3.7 minimum (for Openstack)  
-   nose, 1.3.4 minimum, for testing  
-   coverage, 3.7.1 minimum, for testing  
-   epydoc, 3.0.1 minimum, documentation generation

Tutorial
--------

You can find a discussion of the basic concepts and an overview of the
use of Actuator here.

Documentation
-------------

Currently, the only supplemental documentation are the epydoc-generated
docs, the source html of which can be found  
here. The root document is index.html.

Hadoop Example
--------------

A more significant example of Actuator's use can be found in the
examples directory. It is a set of models that describe setting up a
Hadoop cluster with an arbitrary number of slave nodes. You can see the
readme and associated example files  
here.

Acknowledgements
----------------

The following projects and people have provided inspiration, ideas, or
approaches that are used in Actuator.

-   Elixir: Actuator's declarative style has been informed by Elixir's
    declarative ORM approach. Additionally, Actuator uses a similar
    mechanism to Elixir's for its "with_" functions that provide
    modifications to a modeling class (such as with_variables() and
    with_components()).  
-   Celery: Actuator has re-used some of Celery's notation for
    describing dependencies between tasks and other entities.  
-   John Nolan, who provided a sounding board for ideas and spent time
    pairing on an initial implementation.

